All right, we have made it all the way.
Genesis chapter 50 has been almost a year of chapter by chapter, verse by verse.
I do plan on finishing the book today.
And I'd like to get a running start from where we ended last week.
In Genesis 49, just pick off a couple things.
And that's all I'm going to do today.
I just want to pick off a couple thoughts and move on.
A couple thoughts and move on last week.
We did a lot of deep diving, a lot of cross-reference.
A lot of these things played in that last blessing of Jacob onto his sons, prophetic pictures that weave in through our reading all the way through to Revelation.
But I just want to close in the devotional manner of such a great passage before us.
And we're going to see Jacob's death, and then we'll see Joseph's death.
And amazing, we started with, in the beginning, God said,
And we see the foundations of paradise, and then paradise was lost there in the Garden Fall.
And the last verse that we'll read today is going to say these words, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.
But it's far from the end of the story.
It's far from a disappointment end of the story.
It's God's great promise of the body that represents the promise of God.
And that's why we're going to end this book
in communion because Jesus says, do this in remembrance of me, and it's a promise.
He's coming back for us.
It's a promise that the babe of Bethlehem became the lion of the lamb that went to the cross for us.
And so looking forward to what God has in our study today, Father, we give it to you.
I thank you, Lord, that your word is living in powerful and sharper than a two-edged sword.
Lord, we are so blessed that you give us chapter by chapter and verse by
We don't have to guess and wonder what you're trying to say.
You put it there in black and white for us, inspired from outside of this time domain.
And Lord, as we take this verse in these verses today, God is love.
Perfect love wrote this book, preserved it.
so you can declare your love for us based on who you are, what you've done.
You give us this beautiful place of what we can ask of you to do in our life.
So do what only the word inspired by the Spirit can do.
And all of us, Lord, bring us to this throne of grace,
that you would speak to us and give us the help and our time of need.
What a blessing.
You are an amazing God.
We love you.
We pray this in your name, amen.
I'd like to start with the death of Jacob and the passages.
So it takes us back to, we kind of just hit this end in last week as we looked at the blessing so we could
bring this to pass as we look at this today of Genesis chapter 49 verse 28 as we begin the procession and we're going to see the great procession taking Jacob's body out of Egypt up into the promised land of Canaan.
But he did this blessing for the 12 sons last week is online.
You can look at those notes and hear that audio
But I pick up in verse 28 because there's just a beautiful word for us today and it says, all these are the 12 tribes of Israel.
And this is what their father spoke to them and he blessed them.
He blessed each one according to his own blessing.
I just want to start with a word for us today and as we just passing through these verses and let a little
Little word, minister to us and minister to our heart today.
Do you know God has a unique blessing for every last one of you.
These blessings to these 12 boys was all unique.
None of them were the same for each of them.
God came and he prophetic lead later upon Jacob as he would speak to these 12 boys and give each of them a unique blessing.
And they would take that unique blessing upon themselves and they would take that unique blessing through Egypt.
And we know what's going to happen is 400 years of slavery, but they're going to be one nation together.
They're going to leave Egypt together and they're going to go into a wilderness wandering.
And they're going to go through their wilderness wandering, then they're going to enter into the Promised Land, and they're going to establish a nation.
And the point that I make about this is the unique blessing that each one of these had.
We're going to see some of them were warriors, special gifting in war, some of them were
special gifting and leading some of them were special gifting in merchant scene and you know commerce and these type of things and some of them were special blessings in praise as Judah would be and all of those unique blessings of these 12 would have to come together to be this one
culminating combined blessing for a nation to be born, a nation to sustain and establish, and a nation to go on to be what God called them to be.
And I look at that and I just think of us.
Every last one of us has a unique blessing that's just ours.
My blessing and the Lord would bestow upon me is different from the blessing that He's bestowed upon you.
But if we were to take just
all had the same blessing, we would never establish a body of Christ.
We would never have this oneness in the unity that we have.
We would never encourage us and form this body the way that we do with the uniqueness that we have.
As some of you have the unique blessing in the children's ministry.
Some of you have a unique blessing in the worship ministry.
Some of you have a unique blessing in the warrior
of the prayer warrior blessing.
And all of you, I just want you to know and say and believe God has given me a unique blessing.
And if you're not sure what that is today, we're closing out a year, we're closing out a book, we're closing out a year, we're starting a new year and this could be your time to go Lord, what is my unique blessing?
that you've given me to give to the body of Christ.
And I don't just mean in these church walls, we have a community.
I don't just mean in a community, you have a family.
We're going to talk about grandparents before we close here today.
And we have these unique blessings.
And Lord, what is mine?
And I will share this with you.
And it's not always just a visible ministry that you can see because as I look at, I know what my uniqueness is.
I know what God has given me and said, here's the blessing that I give you that I want you to share.
But I tell you what, when I walk in here and I go, there they are still standing.
What a blessing it is to me.
I know almost all of your stories.
And if I don't, we'd like to hear them.
But Lord, I know their stories.
I know what they go through.
I know the war that they've battled.
I know health.
I know finances.
I know the work and the ministry and the challenges that they have and all these type of things.
And every time I walk in, I go, what an amazing blessing as I look at them.
They encourage my heart to see that God sustains and God holds and God does what he says that he does and just the fact that you keep on keeping on what a blessing it is to everyone around you.
And we're gonna get that opportunity more so as often during this holiday season, I pray that you get to be poured out as a blessing onto your family and those around you.
But again, if you haven't spent time
What a great day to just sit and go.
Lord, I know you've given me a unique blessing.
I look at the children of Israel to form a nation, and I know you've done that for me.
So Lord, if you want to speak to me, tell me.
I know you want to speak to me.
So tell me, what is the blessing that I can pour?
And then in verse 29 through 32, and again, we're just kind of reading through devotionally, and then we're going to do communion.
What a great
passage chapter as it's been formed for us.
In verse 29 through 32, as we come to the death of Jacob, then the funeral procession, the common, verse 29, he says, then he charged them and said to them, I am to be gathered to my people, bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron, the Hittite.
We've studied this, as Abraham would buy this cave.
In the cave that is in the field of MacPella, which is before mammary, keyword, in the land of Canaan, this is the Promised Land, which Abraham bought with the field of Ephra on the Hittite as a possession for burial place.
As we studied, the only possession that Abraham bought, as the richest man, as the great wealth, he only bought one thing, and it was this cave, and what a testimony it is.
There they buried Abraham and Sarah, his wife.
There they buried Isaac and Rebecca, his wife.
And there I buried Leah, the field and the cave that is there were purchased from the sons of half.
This is, you can read through it until you slow down enough to think about it.
Who's the love of his life?
We would read it over and over.
We would speak of it all the times.
Who was the love of his life?
We would all quickly go.
It was Rachel.
But we know from our studies that Rachel, when she died, she was buried in Bethlehem.
And here is Jacob at the end of his life.
Same, bury me next to Leah.
Maybe
you feel trapped in your relationship.
Maybe you go, you know the person I entered the relationship wasn't the person who I thought they were going to be.
I feel even somewhat tricked.
If there's ever a person in the Bible that could say, I was tricked and now I feel trapped, no one could ever come close.
to Jacob.
My uncle, Laban, boy, that guy, that switcharoo and the trick.
I met Rachel and my heart poured out for her.
We made a deal seven years for her and I worked faithfully, seven years for her.
And then on my wedding night, the old switch that Laban brought Leah, the oldest sister,
And then in the morning, what is this?
Oh, you know our culture?
The oldest had to always be married first.
But I tell you what, work seven more years and I'll give you Rachel.
He worked 14 years for Rachel.
And here's the woman that he would go, this is not the woman that I worked for.
This is not the woman that I desired.
This is not the woman that
I wanted to be married to and here I am tricked and maybe even saying trapped.
And I find the fascinating and just the impactfulness of this that at the end of his life he would say, bury me next to Leah, not Rachel.
There's a lot of
prophetic pictures that we can say of Rachel, of course, because Rachel's buried in Bethlehem.
Here we are coming up to Christmas, the lambs that would be sacrificed at the temple, Bethlehem was the place where they would raise those lambs and make sure they were perfect, and then those lambs would go to the temple for Passover to be sacrificed.
Oh, the picture of Jesus Christ, they're born in Bethlehem, become the perfect Lamb of God who take away the sin of the world, and yet here we see this picture,
that Jacob would go, but marry me next to Leah in MacPella, in this cave where Abraham and Isaac and the wives were buried.
You know what I think?
And it's a pondering.
We studied last week, Judah.
They've always known Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, not just that I promise you to land.
I promise you that the Redeemer will come through.
buy you back from the curse of Genesis 3 in the fall that happened, that one would come who would crush the head of the serpent, and he was healed, would be bruised, and it was the picture of the Messiah.
And as we studied last week, it's through Judah, whose Judah's mother, Leah.
And I just put it out there as a pondering for you, is that maybe that person you feel trapped
or you go, this isn't what I thought it would be, is the very person that God's using in your life that you can see the sun, the one who would redeem and the one who would buy you back.
And I can see this through Jacob.
I would have never seen Judah and the line that would come through apart from Leah.
And then Leah, somewhere in this place, becomes this great blessing to the end that he would go, bury me next to Leah.
Amazing.
It's just amazing verse as you look at that.
Well, verse 33, we move on and we look and it says, and when Jacob had finished commanding his sons, he drew his feet up into the bed and breathed his last and he was gathered to his people.
beautiful correlating passages in Hebrews chapter 11 verse 21, or speaking of that, heroes of faith.
By faith Jacob, when he was dying, blessed each of the sons of Joseph and worshiped, leaning on the top of his staff.
So here we are.
We always look at, because as we read, you know, he curls his feet up and what a way to go.
You know, he, he blesses, he speaks prophetically, he speaks to the words of God upon his family, then he curls up his feet.
You can see him pulling on his, pulls up the blanket and lift off and away I go out of this world into the next.
But it appears that whether it was with the boys or just Joseph only, but that
Jacob gets out of the bed and he gets to speak the blessing that he puts upon these boys and it says here and he's leaning on the top of his staff.
We know this staff as it would come when he wrestled with the Lord and that his hip would be put out and for the rest of Jacob's life he has to walk with this limp.
For the rest of his life he has to lean on this staff.
I just, the word for us is, again, we're reading through kind of devotionally today and picking up some of these just things that warm our hearts of, you know, I want to go.
When I leave this world, I want to go out the way that I'm living right now.
My whole life is leaning on Jesus Christ.
I got nothing else.
I literally have nothing else.
This world has nothing here for me and what
I want to be known when I blast off and head into that next place.
There's a man that leaned on Jesus Christ his whole life.
And may it be known his life
was Jesus Christ.
And may we just be that people leaning on the everlasting arms and love of Jesus Christ.
You've been my staff.
I've leaned on you through the hard times, the good times, through prosperity and through famine and through heartbreak of loss and the love of my lives and all these type of things.
But in the end, I'm recorded in the book of Hebrews
leaning on my staff.
Beautiful picture again.
Well, now we get into this chapter 50 as we close here as we're going to start building to the procession of this great procession that takes Jacob out of Egypt into the promised land.
And verse one through three, then Joseph fell on his father's face and wept over him and kissed him.
And Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his father.
So the physicians embalmed Israel.
40 days were required for him.
For sets are the days required for those who are embalmed and the Egyptians mourned for him 70 days.
historical writings and the likes show that it would take 40 days to embalm a body.
It's a fascinating study.
I'll spare you the details of it, you know, of what it would do to embalm a body, but we actually have mummified bodies that, you know, still you can see these type of things.
So 40 days to embalm, Jacob, Joseph will be embalmed here before we finish the chapter, 70 days of mourning.
The historical writings would say 72 days was the days of mourning for a Pharaoh.
So here is the elevation of Jacob, the morning next to almost a Pharaoh.
But here's the amazing thing about his life.
He's being mourned, not for who, what he was in Egypt.
It's what his son was in Egypt.
That's why all of Egypt mourns, it's for who his son is.
And so speaking of his son then takes me to this amazing place as we're reading the end of this book and we look at the life of Joseph.
We're gonna see his last breath and his embalming before we finish here today.
And what I just wanna share with as we finish this book and we consider these things, there's no limit.
of what God can do in any one of our lives here.
Especially you, youth, I hope you can listen well on this.
Here's Joseph.
We've said this time and time again.
Here's this young man, Joseph, 17 years old.
He has no youth group.
He had no children's church.
He had no church at all.
He had no counselors.
He had no Bible.
He had no Chuck tapes.
If you're going through our school discipleship, he had nothing.
And yet he became the man that he became simply because he trusted in the promises of God.
He held on to the promise of God, and he would not trade his relationship with the Lord,
God for anything that the world had to offer.
And I just want to share with all of you, and especially you youth, there is no limit to what God can do in your life.
Absolutely not one, because Joseph is the proof text of what I can do through a life that's yielded to me.
And as we say often, but it's such a great phrase, no man, government, or program can stop the work of God in your life.
only our disobedience and lack of faith.
But God and his ever great forgiveness will do what he will do if we say, here I am.
And as we move on with that, then verse 4 through 11, speaking of Jacob's legacy, it's based on the son that he had, verse 4 through 11,
Now when the days of his morning were passed, Joseph spoke to the household of Pharaoh saying, if I now
I have found favor in your eyes.
Please speak in the heaven, in the hearing of Pharaoh saying, my father made me swear saying, behold, I am dying in my grave, which I dug for myself in the land of Canaan.
There you shall bury me.
Now therefore, please let me go and bury my father and I will come back."
And Pharaoh said, go up and bury your father as he made you swear.
So Joseph went up to bury his father and with him went all the servants of Pharaoh.
Just start imagining what this
session looks like.
It's like when one of our presidents
passes and the rotunda and the capital, and all the world comes to mourn.
And the elders of the land of Egypt, verse 8, as well as the house of Joseph, his brothers, his father's house, only their little ones, their flocks and their hers, they left in the land of Goshen.
And there went up with him both chariots and horsemen, and it was very great gathering.
Then they came to the threshing floor of Atad, which is beyond the Jordan, and then they mourned there with
rate and very solemn lamentations.
He observed seven days of mourning for his father.
And when the inhabitants of the land of the Canaanites saw the morning at the threshing floor of a tad, they said, this is deep mourning of the Egyptians.
Therefore, it's his name was called Abel Mizam, which is beyond the Jordan.
I love it.
In this one thing,
If you get down to it, and we'll see this as Joseph will talk about how God used this, and the brothers are gonna fear in the next verses that once dad's dead, that Joseph's coming for revenge, and we know the story, what it took the Lord to do to get Joseph there to Egypt, and he saves the whole region.
And here we see God bringing this place
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, this burial place in MacPella and all the world of that surrounding area, all the Egyptians are watching going, what is this?
Look at this procession that's leaving Egypt to go up to this burial place and they would all start talking and going, what is this?
They go, Joseph's dad has died.
And then all the Canaanites, they haven't seen this family for 17 years now.
And they're gonna see this great procession coming in with chariots and horses and droves of people and mourning and weeping.
And all the Canaanites would look and go, what is this?
And they would go, Joseph, in Egypt, his father has died.
And everybody would know Joseph.
All of Egypt would know, remember the famine?
Not one of us would be alive if it wasn't for Joseph.
And then everyone in Canaan, during the famine, because we saw the children of Israel, had to come to Egypt to get the food.
And they would go, this is the father of he who saved all of our lives.
And they would all be watching this great procession.
But the point that's so fascinating to me, Jacob's legacy at this moment, at this time, is about who his son is.
It's not about who he is.
All of Egypt and all of Cain and witness because his son was Joseph.
And there again, leaning on the staff, and there again, what a beautiful picture for us.
You know, when we lean in our staff and let the whole world know, I leaned on Jesus to the end.
And let this be our legacy.
Christmas, what a great place to remember the legacy.
Our legacy is who our relationship is with.
the Son.
Let the world know my legacy is that I leaned on Jesus Christ and everything about me came down to one thing.
Everything about you comes down to one thing, Jesus Christ and Him crucified, the rescuer, what He's done.
And if you're looking at this procession, the power of the procession, which is amazing, is
MacPella, as we study, it means double door.
And that's why Abraham, the only purchase he made was this cave in MacPella because he believed the promise of God.
The death doesn't end here on this dirt.
Death may be a cave, a tomb that we go into, but there's a door on the way out and it's the resurrected life.
And they made that witness as people go, man, you lived in tents and you were no mad and you just wandered through the land except that one place, that one piece of property that you would spend your money on.
And it's this cave and it was Abraham, Isaac, and now Jacob is making the procession of that he would say, make sure I'm buried, Egypt's not my home, bury me in the land that was promised to our fathers and promised to us all the way through all the generations that we had and let all the world know every time they
would come and go, man, these people, they believe there is life on the other side of this life here on this earth.
And a tad is the word, threshing floor, which is a fascinating weaving that God weaves together because a threshing floor was where you would beat the seed out of the husk.
And I know
You know, the wheat thrashing, that was easy as we would study.
They'd put a sled and they'd break it up and they'd throw it up into the wind and the wind would blow the chaff and the grain of wheat would fall.
I had no idea how much harder it is for rice when I was in the poll and I would watch people just to beat the rice out of the stock.
And I go, that's a lot of work.
But then the next morning, because I'm watching them beat, I go, man, that is work.
They sit there and they beat it.
And they beat it.
And then they take them and bag it.
And then I go, then the next morning, there they are, the women.
They got these 20, 30-pound sacks of rice on their shoulder and their walk.
And then I said to the husband, I go, where are they going?
Oh, well, now they have to go and take it down the such and such because that's where they break the seed out of the husk, the hole.
And then I went and I looked at the stock and I go, I never noticed that in all my life.
I just thought the grain fell out.
What did I know?
You know, I'm American.
I go in and pay, go in American, walk through the store, buy 30 pounds of rice, whatever.
But it has to be broken out of the husk to get the seed that can be eaten and can sustain life.
And here again, the pictures that God weaves for us of.
Man, we have to be broken apart from this husk of this body that we're in as we're going to celebrate communion at the end.
But God broke through this body to open up for the life that's inside this husk and this hall to set us free.
And here's the picture that's made as all the procession is made and everybody's looking of the threshing floor where we
beat and break out the grain.
And then Jesus would say, unless a grain of wheat falls into the ground, life will not be produced.
And they watch them come into McPella, the double doors, that there is more to death than entry.
There is a resurrection and the way out.
And yet we come and we just see all of his life at the end of his life.
It's based on the sun that he knew.
Beautiful.
words and now verse 12 through 13 14.
So his sons did for him just as he had commanded them for his sons carried him to the land of Canaan and buried him in the cave in the field of MacPella before mammary, which Abraham bought with the field from Ephra on the Hittite as property for burial place.
And after he had buried his father,
Joseph returned to Egypt, he and his brothers and all who went up with him to bury him.
So as we're looking at the end of the life of Jacob, the best years of his life or better said, the best chapters of Jacob's life have been the last two chapters that we just read.
What an amazing and all of its faults and all of its failings and all of these conniving and scheming.
And here we see the man living up to his name governed by God.
And then the end of his life, he is seen.
I'm just leaning on my staff.
I'm leaning on the sun and the beauty of his life.
And just as I would say at the beginning, God has a unique blessing for every last one of you.
But I also want to say this.
because it can become forgetful.
Especially the more we have failures and the more we find ourselves and the faults, you know, you are way less spiritual today than when you first got saved.
And I say that as a cliche because you go, what?
I've been walking with the Lord, man, I'm growing in the faith and these type of things.
I tell you what, after 35 years, more and more and more, I realized just how flawed I am.
When I first got saved, I thought there was that one or two things, you know, but then all the same, oh, I got those big things, you know, those big things.
It was like the little boy, you know, he was,
walking through his walking through the living room and he was whistling and snapping his finger.
At the same time and dad says, what are you doing son?
He goes, well, I think two hardest things in life are whistling and snapping your finger.
And if I can get these things, get these two things down, the rest of life is going to be a breeze.
And you know, we get saved and then we see these couple big things in our life and go, you know, when I get past this and I get it, the rest of life is going to be a breeze and you all know what you're
one or two things where when you first gave your life to the Lord, but then I'll say you get over those things and I'll say you start looking in the mirror, the mirror of God's word and you start seeing how far you short you fall in selfishness or pride or love and these type of things and I'll say you start seeing more and more.
Lord, I need you to work here.
I need you to do a work and do these type of things in my life to transform me and bring me into this place and
I look at the life of Jacob there, and you know, his best chapters, all of his faults and the valence, at the very end of his life, he's just simply leaning on Jesus.
He comes to this place, it's God or nothing for me.
And I want to say, your best chapters, they're now.
And there's an easy place for us to look and start looking at the culmination of our failures, then the culmination of God's transformation and the glory that he's done in us and go, Lord, my best chapters of my life can be now and you've given me unique blessing, gifting what is it and how do you want me to use it.
And I just pray, today as we end, because it's beautiful, we're ending with enough time left in the month of December to go,
What do I want my year in to be in the beginning of my year?
What is it that I want to see God do in 2026?
I usually ask the Lord and He usually gives me a verse somewhere that is kind of a verse that I keep coming back to throughout the year and remembering the word that He gave me.
I think one of the, I think just a beautiful word that He gave me this week was
for 2026, Revelation chapter 1 verse 19.
Write the things that you've seen, the things which are, and the things that shall be.
And in that, it unfolds through the rest of the book of Revelation.
That's the vine outline.
Write the things that you've seen, speaking of the glorified Christ, walking in chapter 1.
Write the things are, and it's God's work among the churches in chapter 2 and 3.
And then write the things which will be in a prophetic picture of all the rest of the book of Revelation, all the way to the new heaven and the new earth of Genesis, Revelation 21 and 22.
And I said, you know, that would be a great unfolding for a year.
Spend my life, my year speaking.
Let me tell you about Jesus Christ and what He did when He walked this earth.
Whether it's in the church, a mission field, a community, or a home.
And then at the same spend time, let me tell you what God's doing today.
His spirit's alive, his spirit's moving in the church in America and wants to move in your hearts and your lives.
And then spend the time telling people, he's coming back.
And there's a new heaven and a new earth, but before that,
There's gonna be a rapture and there's gonna be a period of tribulation.
What a way to spend the 2026 and I see these and I go, man, Lord, the best chapters can still be ahead of us.
It may take sacrifice for you and a willingness to say, you know, to have my best chapter, Lord, I might have to
Do some dying, as we're seeing in this chapter, to the things around me and the things of my life.
I was sharing this story with some of you who were in the prophecy update last a couple weeks ago.
But when I was in the Paul, I got the honor to teach the main service.
They worship on Saturday.
They work six days weeks.
Sunday is the first day of the work.
week for them, but I got the honor to do a Saturday service and a couple missionaries from
We're passing through, they established these various types of ministries throughout Asia and that area in the Middle East, kind of under radar type stuff, and they came up after because I was there, I was the American, I was, you know, they were Americans, we're in Nepal, and they came up, these two missionaries from Texas, and they started to talk to me, and they started telling me about how they train,
train people up and they place them in various ministries.
It's just a glorious in this man, these two, their faith for 30 years of doing this type of ministry.
But he tells me this story that just as our conversations are going, he goes, you know, we train people, natives.
And then we use them for the ministry throughout the various places there in this region of Asia in the Middle East.
And he goes,
So we trained, brought this young woman, a young adult, now at her age, to Christ.
We trained her up and we taught her the things of the Lord.
She turned into this amazing light of the world.
She had just the zeal of the Lord and the joy of the Lord.
And she was from Afghanistan.
And where they were minestrain,
Not to name the country, but the country came back and said, all Afghanis must leave our country.
They can no longer stay in this country.
And so her immediate directors would have been, you have to go back to Afghanistan.
And if you know Afghanistan and you're a zeal of the Lord and the light of the world, you can lose your life in Afghanistan for being so outspoken.
And this young adult was full on outspoken in her faith.
And the missionary tells me and he goes, so we said, it's very likely that she'll perish and die a martyr's death if she goes back to Afghanistan.
So
We started working to get her into the United States.
We had a lot of connections, and we had a lot of means to make this happen.
This is a recent story, by the way.
And all the things lined up that we could bring her back to the United States.
And she'd be a blessing in these type of things.
And so she's like, sure, that's OK.
And then as things were lining up, the missionary tells me he goes, then I said to her, you know, I do have this great concern is that if you come to the United States of America, that your zeal is going to go lukewarm because you'll become like so many Americans in the church and you'll just grow lukewarm in your faith.
And here's this young adult, she's like 19 years old.
And she said, you know what, if going to Afghanistan and dying of martyrs death is my way, I would rather go back to Afghanistan and die martyrs death than possibly go to America and die a spiritual death into lukewarmness.
And the reason I make the point of I just got done teaching the Saturday service and there's 150 people there and it was, I'm sitting there and I'm saying, this girl should have been the one up here preaching.
She should have came up and told the story of the sacrifice and the story she's willing to lay out for her life.
And I find these amazing stories and for us we're not gonna be
I don't think that's going to be our choice that we're going to have to make.
And that's a beautiful thing.
But I think there's a place for all of us that we can go, you know, my best chapters like Jacob can be these last chapters of my life.
But I have to make the determination that they're going to be.
And it may come down into a sacrifice to do such just that.
Well, as we move on, as we
Look at this chapter as it closes out.
In verse 15 through 17, Jacob's dead.
Now here comes the boys.
They start thinking maybe Joseph only was gracious to us because dad was alive, verse 15 through 17.
When Joseph's brother saw that their father was dead, they said, perhaps Joseph will hate us and may actually repay us for all the evil which we did to him.
So they sent messengers to Joseph saying, before your father died, he commanded saying, I don't know if this really happened, but this is their search story.
Thus you shall say to Joseph, I beg you, please forgive the trespasses of your brother and their sin, for they didn't
evil to you.
Now please forgive the trespass of the servant of God of your father.
And here's the key.
And Joseph wept when they spoke to him.
You know why Joseph is weeping?
His heart is breaking that you could actually come and say such things to me.
That you actually did not know that I fully forgave you.
And that now after dad's death that you could somehow think
that my forgiveness wasn't final.
And what a picture, because all through our study, we've been looking at Joseph as a picture of Jesus Christ.
And I will tell you this for all of us, myself included, if you want to break the heart of God, question that you're forgiven.
Question that he has forgiven you, because he will say, I came as the Lamb
The babe of Bethlehem and I went to the cross as the Lamb of God so that you and I can have this relationship and this oneness together.
How could you ever question my great love for you and my forgiveness for you?
And so there's a place for us that we have to, whether it's with the Lord, you're forgiven.
That is done.
When Jesus said on the cross, it is done, it is done.
Just live that.
You're never gonna move on to the joy of a Christian life.
You're never gonna live your best chapters of your life if you keep going back and wondering if you're still, if you're forgiven.
If the God goes, yeah, I saved you, but man, you've been a disappointment to me.
We see the life of Joseph said, when I said, it's done, it's done.
And so two takeaways for you in your personal life today.
When you tell someone that you've forgiven them, then you need to settle that and end that.
You cannot go back in time for what you said you forgave and bring it back up.
Jesus said, God tells us, as far as east is from the west, I put your sin away.
When you say that you forgive somebody, you need to be sure that you have, and you need to sit with the Lord and go, I said, I forgive, gave them.
I told them.
I said, I forgive you.
That needs to be done because they can't live the rest of their life with my possible unforgiveness to come back upon them.
And all, boy, you need this in your relationships, whether it's in the church, the people you work with, or in your homes, and the people that are part of your family.
When you forgive, you need to let it be done.
And then there's a place, and when someone forgives you, it's done.
Receive it and let it be done.
and just move on in the freedom that comes with it.
And there's another freedom that comes with it in verse 18 and 19, as Joseph's gonna say here, then his brothers also went and fell down before his face and they said, behold, we are your servants.
Joseph said to them, do not be afraid for am I in the place of God.
You're my brothers, you're not my servants.
This is one of the things that he's saying, but here is the perfect freedom that comes in this place for all of us.
Speaking of forgiveness is if you want to be totally free.
Joseph's making this statement, let God be the judge.
We as a church, we can very much think, okay, it's our role to judge and God's role to love.
And God
especially this verse right here, your role is to love and let me decide what the judgment shall be.
And if you can come to that, if I can come to that, it's not, doesn't matter what you've done to me, doesn't matter what these, God, you judge them, you deal with them as you determine, I simply need to love them.
And if they will want reconciliation, I will extend forgiveness to them.
I mean, to be forgiven, you have to come and say, forgive me, I've sinned against you.
And when you say, I forgive you, it's done.
But we just leave the freedom and we can walk in the freedom, Lord, whatever.
Do you want to do with judgment, whether they ask for forgiveness or not?
That's up to you, me.
I'm just going to love them as Christ loves them.
And then as verse 20 and 21, still great depths and heart of God in this.
But as
But as for you, you men evil against me, but God meant it for good in order to bring it about as it is this day to save many people alive.
Now therefore do not be afraid.
I will provide for you and your little ones and he comforted them and spoke kindly to them.
Here's Joseph, he's coming and saying, you know, you thought in this and you saw
only this, but you couldn't see what the biggest picture is.
And this is where Joseph is.
It's amazing the heart and the forgiveness and the way you can minister to someone when you know there's a bigger story, when there's a bigger plan.
And so often we become critical and judgmental when we just know this little sliver.
We don't know the full story of what God's doing.
We don't know the full story of what's going on in their life.
We don't even know the full story of why and what happened in our relationship with them.
But then as time goes on, maybe we start seeing a bigger picture and we go, oh, wow.
And this is what Joseph, oh, wow, man.
Now I see I had, I was the vessel that God chose to save a people.
Not only did he save Egypt, he saved all of Canaan.
And so brothers, here's how it went.
God had to get me the vessel down to Egypt.
That's where you came in.
You sold me into the slavery.
God had to get me into the prison so that I can interpret the dream.
That's where Potiphar's wife came in.
And of course, the butler and the baker, they forgot me, but God never did.
And then here would come the
Passing that I would interpret the dream and now here I became the second in the land and you know when we see that whole picture and we can what we're never gonna see the whole picture in the middle of the picture It's a damn we go.
Wow God.
How do you put all these things together?
But I a word a takeaway for us for maybe your life very specifically today the pain That you may be going through
is the very pain that God needs to use to scream out to you, what he wants to do in your life.
And there's a place by faith that we come to and go, the plan is always greater than the pain.
C.S.
Lewis, he writes and he speaks of the problem with pain in his book, and he uses the correlation of Job, the life that Job lived.
And you know, we all come and we go,
We would all agree we're in a spiritual war.
We wrestle not against flesh and blood, principalities and power.
We're in this spiritual war.
We're soldiers in this battle and then we go, we're on a battlefield.
We're in a fight together.
I love how C.S.
Lewis said and he speaks of Job that kind of changes the whole picture of it.
We're not on the battlefield, Christian.
We are the battlefield.
There is a fight going on between the Lord and the devil, and the devil wants to still kill and destroy, and the Lord wants to give us life in that more abundant.
And there's this place I know from my life, and I think you do too, in my pleasure, God's just a whisper.
But in my pain, I can hear God like no other time.
The clarity of his voice, it's almost as a shout coming from heaven that it's in the pain that God has done the greatest things in my life.
And here's Joseph telling this story of what you intended for evil.
God had a whole plan for me.
And verse 22 and 23, so Joseph dwelt in Egypt and his father's household and Joseph lived 110 years.
We're starting to see the age drop due to the fall.
Verse 23, Joseph saw Ephraim, his two sons, Ephraim and Manassas.
Joseph saw Ephraim's children to the third generation.
So he's got great, great, great grandchildren.
The children of Makar, the son of Manassas were also brought up on Joseph's knee.
Hey, grandparents.
just a short point there.
Grandparents, you have the greatest chapters of your life because there is nothing of the impact of anyone that I believe a grandparent can make.
And you got your Christmas coming up, you got your grandkids regardless of their age where maybe they're not, maybe they're too big to put on your knees, maybe they're not, but you get to sit and tell stories
of them of your life.
And I remember my grandfather, oh, what a storyteller.
And here I am all these years later.
I remember his stories of being in the World War.
I remember his stories of him being a champion boxer.
I remember his stories of how the place we lived in Western Pennsylvania, that he was the real estate agent who kind of shaped all those type of things.
And I remember all these stories.
that he would tell me, because he was my grandfather, and I would listen to every story that he had, and I enjoyed all the stories that he had.
And here you are.
You get the same.
You're grandkids.
This is grandma.
This is grandpa.
I love hearing their stories, and so you got a Christmas coming up.
You can tell them stories of, hey, I want to share a story about my life and what God has done, or maybe pick up the Bible and read the story in Luke
on Christmas to them.
Let me share this story with you.
And as we close our verses, and then we're going to take communion here.
Verse 24, and Joseph said to his brethren, I am dying.
but God will surely visit you and bring you out of this land to the land of which he swore to Abraham to Isaac and to Jacob.
Then Joseph took an oath from the children of Israel saying, God will surely visit you and you shall carry up my bones from here.
So Joseph died being 110 years old and they embalmed him and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.
So the worship team come back up
want to enter into a time of communion for us today, what a way to end the book.
And sometimes Joseph gets questioned, why would you say, take my bones, go through the burden of taking my bones back up to the land of Canaan?
And it's real simple, because it's this one thing, the body and bones of Joseph.
were the representation of the promise of God, of the promise that God says that I will bring you back up to this land, and that there is a promise in this land that God has for His people, as He spoke to Israel, that I will make you a great nation, I will give you this land, and then the great promise that has been given to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and now through Judah, the promise of the Messiah.
And as we hold this cup in our hand today, God's given us the same, here's my body, given for you.
It's a remembrance of the promise that I will complete what I said I will do.
And when I said it's done, it's done.
When I said it's forgiven, it's forgiven.
And you can come in and you can rest and you can hold this cup and always know that it is done.
We're going to do a worship song.
How many worship songs you got?
We're going to do two.
We're gonna do a worship song, and then we're gonna take communion, then we're gonna do a worship song, your pick.